# Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency

The Gap Analysis Program (GAP) is a nationwide program sponsored by the Biological Resources Division (BRD) of the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) and is conducted at the state level. National standards ensure edge-matching between adjacent states and will eventually allow for regional and national assessments of biodiversity. Gap analysis utilizes Geographic Information Systems (GIS) technology to map the distribution of plant communities and terrestrial vertebrate animal species, and determine the degree of protection that biological reserves and conservation lands provide to species-rich areas and, hence, identify the “gaps” in representation of biodiversity (Scott et al. 1993). The geographic data layers required to conduct GAP include plant communities or vegetation types, predicted terrestrial vertebrate species distributions, and land ownership/land management status in which lands are categorized as to the current level of management for biodiversity conservation.

The Tennessee Biodiversity and Gap Analysis Program is a federal/state/private joint venture. Coordination of the joint venture was achieved through a steering committee with representatives from the following agencies: Tennessee Conservation League, Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency, Tennessee Technological University, Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation, Tennessee Department of Agriculture, U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service, University of Tennessee, Tennessee Valley Authority, Westvaco, and U. S. Forest Service. The Tennessee Gap Analysis Project (TN-GAP) is housed at the Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency (TWRA).

One of the first GIS layers developed for TN-GAP was the general land cover layer. Landsat Thematic Mapper (TM) satellite imagery provided the basis of land cover mapping in Tennessee. Portions of twelve Landsat TM scenes dated 1990-1993 were used for the spectral classification of open water, pasture/grassland, cultivated crop land, deciduous forest, coniferous forest, urban, barren land, and cloud/cloud shadow. Polygons of forested and nonforested wetlands from the U. S. Fish and Wildlife National Wetland Inventory (NWI) were digitized and added to the classification file. Ancillary data sets were used to add strip mine, rock quarry, and gravel pit locations to the data file. Classes were validated using 1:58,000-scale, color infrared, National High Altitude Photography (NHAP) transparencies.

The forest classes from the Anderson Level II land cover file were further refined to create a detailed vegetation map utilizing aerial videography and other ancillary data sources. Forested lands cover approximately 49% of the state. Approximately 4000 km of video transects were flown over a representative portion of forested lands during mid-April 1995. Geographic position data were recorded with a GPS unit and related to the time encoded on the video. This coding allowed the satellite image to be related to the corresponding video image and allowed an exact location on the ground to be determined during fieldwork. A library of video prints of forest communities created from the field visits was used to interpret the remainder of the videography. Video interpretation and labeling of forest classes were performed in stages by physiographic provinces, in order to take advantage of the variation in the vegetation due to differences in geology and landform. Labeling of forested classes is guided by the National Vegetation Classification: Alliances of the Southeastern United States developed by the regional office of The Nature Conservancy. Classification techniques performed on the forested regions of the satellite imagery were correlated with the interpreted aerial videography. Statistical information (spectral class, slope, elevation, and aspect) surrounding the location of interpreted sites were collected. Inference rules compiled from the summary tables and additional ancillary data were used to create the detailed vegetation map. The final vegetation maps were used with habitat relationship models to predict vertebrate distributions.

Tennessee’s native fauna includes approximately 62 amphibians, 56 reptiles, 71 mammals, and 170 breeding birds. Habitat data for these species resides in the generalized Vertebrate Characterization Abstracts (VCA) and the more specific Tennessee Animal Biographies System (TABS). Updated information has been incorporated into TABS from the Fish and Wildlife Information Exchange Master Species Files from Virginia Polytechnic Institute. The primary source of habitat and distribution data for birds was the Atlas of Breeding Birds of Tennessee and The Land Managers’ Guide to the Birds of the South.

Distribution data from TABS and VCA databases have been incorporated into the GIS to produce range maps for all 359 species based on county, watershed, and physiographic province of occurrence. Ranges for nonbreeding wintering birds in Tennessee were not mapped. The range maps were compared to available data sources such as the Annotated Checklist and Bibliography of Amphibians and Reptiles of Tennessee the Handbook of Mammals of the South- Central States , and the Biodiversity of the Southeastern United States. Comments were solicited from state biologists about the range data. The range maps were then translated into the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) hexagonal grid. Ecological Services of the Tennessee Natural Heritage Program provided data for rare species.

Vertebrate distributions are predicted by mapping the potential range of each species and relating habitat preference to the vegetation map within each species’ range. Data sources for the habitat relationship models are TABS, VCA, the Land Manager’s Guide to Birds of the South and the Land Manager’s Guide to the Amphibians and Reptiles of the South . The vertebrate distribution maps are predictive and may be generalized in some cases, a major factor for the generalization being that the vegetation maps do not contain information on structure or age class. Several animal species are dependent upon this structure and age class. The final distribution maps for all terrestrial vertebrate species were overlaid and analyzed to determine areas of species richness. Analysis of species richness can be generated for each taxon based on range data and habitat preferences. Areas of species richness, when overlaid with locations of publicly managed lands can determine the protection afforded to biodiversity.

The TWRA GIS maintains coverages of major public lands and acquired wetlands in the state. The land ownership coverage includes all federally and state-owned land, as well as local and privately owned lands that are managed for conservation. To obtain an estimate of the protection afforded biodiversity, land ownership was assigned a land management status category. A subcommittee, formed to categorize the lands as to their management status, developed five categories for Tennessee. The land management status categories range from Status 1, for those lands with a management plan for providing the greatest amount of protection to biodiversity, to Status 4, for those lands not identified as functioning to conserve biodiversity. The public lands database, when overlaid with the vertebrate species distributions, can identify the “gaps” in biodiversity protection.

Public lands comprise approximately 8% of the total land area of Tennessee with 4.8% under federal and 2.7% under state jurisdiction. The U.S. Forest Service administers the largest amount of public land in the state, and this land is located in the mountainous regions of East Tennessee. TWRA administers the largest amount of state-owned land. Less than 2% of the state occurs in status 1 and 2 lands.

Approximately 52% of the state falls under the category “natural community.” Of this percentage, only 8% are under federal jurisdiction and 4% are under state jurisdiction. The remainder is privately owned. All 22 natural community types are located on federal lands and all but three plant community types are located on state lands. All natural plant communities, with the exception of one type, are represented to some degree under land management status 1 or 2.

Overall species, breeding birds, and neotropical migrants have a relatively higher area containing higher species richness in status 1 and status 2. Mammals show the largest amount of area; each category predicts a species richness of 31 to 35, except for status 4 with species richness of 26 to 30. The largest area per status type for reptiles was 21 to 25 species for all status types except status 5. Amphibians show the highest area per land status at 12 to 13 species for all land status types except land status 5.

The Tennessee Biodiversity Program (established by the Tennessee Conservation League) and TWRA’s GIS division are continuing to work together to provide planners and community leaders, landowners, natural resource professionals, and educators with information on Tennessee’s natural resources. TWRA provides TN-GAP data and related GIS data layers as Arc View files to county planners and community leaders. Managing Natural Resources - A Planning Guide for the Elk River Watershed of South Central Tennessee and Northern Alabama was published by TWRA, TCL, TVA and National GAP as a planning guide for developing and carrying out natural resource conservation and management programs.
